>> Woodruff: THE GUNM WHOAN
MURDERED 12 PEOPLE AT
WASHINGTON'S NAVY YARD SHOWED
SIGNS OF MENTAL ILLNESS AND
COMPLAINED OF HEARING VOICES,
BUT WAS STILL ABLE TO KEEP HIS
SECURITY CLEARANCE.
>> Ifill: PLUS,HE S TTORY OF
FAMILIES WHOSE LIVES HAVE BEEN
WASHED AWAY BY DEVASTATING
FLOODS IN COLORADO.
>> I ACTUALLY SAW THE FACE OF MY
HOUSE, MY GUT WENT TO MY FEET.
THERE WAS NOTHING SALVAGEABLE.
I DON'T EVEN KNOW HOW TO
DESCRIBE IT.
>> Woodruff: AND WE TREK NORTH--
FAR NORTH-- WHERE MELTING ARCTIC
ICE HAS SPURRED A BOOM IN
SHIPPING, BUT RAISED CONCERNS
ABOUT NAVIGATING UNCHARTED
WATERS.
>> I THINK THE SURFACE OF MARS
HAS BEEN MAPPED BETTER THAN OUR
OCEANS HAVE BEEN.
>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING.
M JUI'DY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: OUR LEAD STORY
TONIGHT: A FULLER PICTURE IS
EMERGING OF THE MAN WHO OPENED
FIRE, KILLING A DOZEN CIVILIANS
AT THE NAVY YARD IN WASHINGTON.
AARON ALEXIS HAD A HISTORY OF
TROUBLE DURING HIS MILITARY
SERVICE, AND MAY HAVE HAD MENTAL
PROBLEMS IN RECENT MONTHS, BUT
IT REMAINED UNCLEAR WHAT DROVE
HIM TO START SHOOTING.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON HIS STATE OF
MIND, AND THE STATE OF THE
INVESTIGATION, RIGHT AFTER THE
REST OF THE DAY'S NEWS.
>> Woodruff: FIVE FORMER NEW
ORLEANS POLICEMEN WON A NEW
TRIAL TODAY IN THE SHOOTINGS OF
UNARMED CIVILIANS AFTER
HURRICANE KATRINA.
TWO PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND FOUR
WOUNDED ON THE CITY'S DANZIGER
BRIDGE.
TODAY A FEDERAL JUDGE TODAY
THREW OUT THE OFFICERS'
CONVICTIONS ON CIVIL RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS.
HE ACCUSED PROSECUTORS OF "TRULY
BIZARRE ACTIONS," INCLUDING
POSTING ANONYMOUS COMMENTS
ONLINE.
THE TOLL OF DEATH AND
DESTRUCTION IN THE COLORADO
FLOODS CLIMBED AGAIN TODAY.
AUTHORITIES CONFIRMED EIGHT
DEAD, WITH SEVERAL HUNDRED STILL
UNACCOUNTED FOR.
AT LEAST 1,600 HOMES WERE LISTED
AS DESTROYED.
MEANWHILE, NEW EVACUATIONS BEGAN
AS THE FLOOD TIDE MOVED
DOWNSTREAM.
IN NEW JERSEY, INVESTIGATORS
HAVE RULED A FIRE THAT DESTROYED
MORE THAN 50 BEACHFRONT
BUSINESSES WAS ACCIDENTAL.
IN SEASIDE PARK AND SEASIDE
HEIGHTS LAST WEEK.
IT ENGULFED A NUMBER OF
BUILDINGS THAT HAD ONLY JUST
BEEN REPAIRED AFTER LAST YEAR'S
SUPERSTORM SANDY.
TODAY OFFICIALS SAID THEY TRACED
THE FIRE TO WIRING THAT WAS
SUBMERGED DURING THE STORM.
>> THAT I BELIEVE THE WIRING WAS
SOMETIME AFTER 1970.
IT'S POSSIBLE THAT THE WIRES
JUST BECAUSE OF ITS AGE ALONE
COULD HAVE STARTED THIS FIRE BUT
WE ALSO KNOW THAT NOT ONLY IS
AGE A PART OF IT, THE STORM IS
VERY CLEAR THAT WE'RE SEEING THE
EFFECT OF THIS PARTICULAR AREA
OF THE BOARD WALK.
>> Woodruff: THE OFFICIALS
WARNED THERE MAY BE COMPROMISED
WIRING AT A NUMBER OF PLACES
THAT WERE HIT BY SANDY.
THE FIVE PERMANENT MEMBERS OF
THE U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL MET
TODAY ON DISPOSING OF SYRIA'S
CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
THE U.S., BRITAIN, CHINA,
FRANCE, AND RUSSIA ARE TRYING TO
CRAFT A RESOLUTION BASED ON A
U.S.-RUSSIAN AGREEMENT.
THE WESTERN POWERS WANT THE U.N.
TO AUTHORIZE MILITARY FORCE IF
SYRIA FAILS TO COMPLY.
RUSSIA DOES NOT.
IN IRAQ, BAGHDAD WAS HIT HARD
AGAIN BY CAR BOMBINGS THAT
KILLED AT LEAST TWO DOZEN.
AND IN THE WEST, SUICIDE BOMBERS
ATTACKED A POLICE STATION IN
FALLUJAH, KILLING EIGHT OTHERS.
E DETHATH TOLL SINCE THE
VIOLENCE BEGAN IN APRIL IS WELL
OVER 4,000.
THE PRESIDENT OF AFGHANISTAN,
HAMID KARZAI, MADE CLEAR TODAY
HE'S IN NO RUSH TO SIGN A
SECURITY DEAL WITH THE U.S.
IT WOULD SET LEGAL CONDITIONS
FOR SOME FOREIGN TROOPS TO
REMAIN AFTER 2014, WHEN COMBAT
FORCES WITHDRAW.
THE U.S. WANTS A DEAL BY NEXT
MONTH, BUT KARZAI INSISTED HIS
DEMANDS FOR SECURITY GUARANTEES
AND BETTER WEAPONS MUST BE MET.
>> ( translated ): IF THE
AMERICANS DO NOT GIVE US THE
GUARANTEES WE HAVE ASKED FOR
UNTIL OCTOBER AND WE DO NOT
REACH AN AGREEMENT THEY CAN WAIT
FOR THE NEXT GOVERNMENT.
IT'S NOT NECESSARY FOR ME TO
SIGN IT.
THE NEXT PRESIDENT WILL COME.
THERE WILL BE AN ELECTION AND
THEY WILL SIGN IT WITH THEM.
>> Woodruff: THE AFGHAN
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION IS NEXT
APRIL.
BRAZIL'S PRESIDENT, DILMA
ROUSSEFF, HAS DELAYED A STATE
VISIT TO THE U.S. TO PROTEST
SPYING BY THE NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT TODAY FOLLOWED
REVELATIONS THAT THE N.S.A.
INTERCEPTED ROUSSEFF'S
COMMUNICATIONS AND HACKED
COMPUTERS AT THE STATE-RUN OIL
COMPANY.
HER OFFICE SAID THE VISICAN T BE
RESCHEDULED WHEN THE U.S.
PROVIDES SATISFACTORY ANSWERS.
THE WRECKED ITALIAN CRUISE SHIP
"COSTA CONCORDIA" WAS PULLED
UPRIGHT TODAY OFF THE COAST OF
TUSCANY.
THE OPERATION DREW WORLDWIDE
ATTENTION, JUST AS THE SHIP DID
WHEN IT CAPSIZED IN JANUARY OF
2012.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM EMMA
MURPHY OF INDEPENDENT TELEVISION
NEWS.
>> AND SO AFTER THE 21 MONTHS
THE COSTA CONCORDIA" IS RIGHTED
IN THE WATER WHICH IS ENGULFED
HER.
BUT SHE'S A SHIP DAMAGED BEYOND
REPAIR AND BOUND FOR A SCRAP
YARD.
IT'S VERY CLEAR TO SEE WHY THIS
114,000 TON VESSEL TIPPED.
NOW THE FULL EXTENT OF THE
DAMAGE CAN BE ASSESSED, THOSE
WHO RAISED HER ARE AMAZED SHE
STAYED IN ONE PIECE.
ENSURE SHE DIDN'T BREAK UP, THIS
PREVENTED AN ENVIRONMENTAL
DISASTER AND THE MAN WHO
MASTERMINDED THE SALVAGE HAS
BECOME SOMETHING OF A LOCAL
HERO.
SO WHAT ABOUT HOW IT SFWHENT.
>> IT WAS BETTER THAN WE
EXPECTED BUT, YOU KNOW, THE
RESULT IS RIGHT THERE, IT'S
PERFECT.
>> Reporter: AND ARE YOU HOPEFUL
NOW THAT YOU MIGHT BE ABLE TO
RECOVER THE REMAINS OF THOSE WHO
ARE STILL LOST?
>> THAT'S WHAT WE'RE HOPING FOR.
>> Reporter: YOU MUST BE VERY
PROUD OF WHAT WE'VE ACHIEVED.
>> IT WAS A WONDERFUL TEAM
EFFORT.
>> Reporter: THE 500 MILLION
POUND OPERATION TOOK 19 HOURS.
THIS TIME LAPSE FOOTAGE SHOWS
HOW THE VESSEL WAS RAISED
THROUGH 65 DEGREES IN ORDER TO
REST HER ON A FALSE SEABED
DESIGNED TO SUPPORT HER UNTIL
SHE IS TAKEN FROM HERE.
FOR THE
3,968 PEOPLE WHO WERE ABLE TO
ESCAPE FROM THE SINKING
"CONCORDIA" THESE IMAGES WILL BE
A DREADFUL REMINDER OF THAT
ORDEAL.
BUT THERE'S RELIEF THE SHIP WAS
RITEDGH, SHELL FOREVER BE
ASSOCIATED WITH TRAGEDY.
EN Woodruff: 32 PEOPLE DIED WH
THE CRUISE LINER STRUCK A REEF
AND ROLLED OVER.
THE U.S. POVERTY RATE FAILED TO
IMPROVE IN 2012 FOR THE SIXTH
YEAR IN A ROW.
THE CENSUS BUREAU REPORTED TODAY
THAT SOME 46.5 MILLION AMERICANS
WERE CONSIDERED POOR IN 2012.
THAT AMOUNTS TO 15% OF THE
POPULATION, STATISTICALLY
UNCHANGED FROM THE YEAR BEFORE.
THE POVERTY LINE WAS SET AT AN
ANNUAL INCOME OF JUST UNDER
$23,500 FOR A FAMILY OF FOUR.
THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
NOW ESTIMATES THE GOVERNMENT
COULD DEFAULT ON ITS DEBTS
BETWEEN THE END OF OCTOBER AND
MID-NOVEMBER.
THE NEW TIMELINE IS ABOUT TWO
WEEKS LATER THAN THE PREVIOUS
ESTIMATE.
CONGRESS CAN PREVENT DEFAULT BY
RAISING THE NATIONAL DEBT
CEILING, BUT IN EXCHANGE, SOME
REPUBLICANS ARE DEMANDING THE
PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW BE
DEFUNDED.
IN ECONOMIC NEWS, THE LABOR
DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCED HOME HEALTH
CARE WORKERS ARE NOW ELIGIBLE
FOR THE FEDERAL MINIMUM WAGE AND
OVERTIME PAY.
THEIR RANKS HAVE GROWN TO NEARLY
TWO MILLION.
AND ON WALL STREET, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINED
ALMOST 35 POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE
15,529.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 27
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 3745.
STILL AHEAD ON THE NEWSHOUR,
WHAT IS KNOWN ABOUT YESTERDAY'S
TRAGIC SHOOTING IN WASHINGTON;
COMMUNITIES DEVASTATED AND
FAMILIES DISPLACED BY THE
COLORADO FLOODS; ANSWERS TO YOUR
QUESTIONS ABOUT HEALTH CARE
REFORM; MELTING ARCTIC ICE OPENS
UP UNCHARTED WATERS; AND EDWIDGE
DANTICAT ON HER LATEST NOVEL.
>> Ifill: NOW, MORE ON OUR LEAD
STORY, THE WASHINGTON NAVY YARD
SHOOTINGS.
INVESTIGATORS TURNED UP MORE
DETAILS TODAY ON THE GUNMAN, AS
THE NATION'S CAPITAL HONORED THE
DEAD.
IT WAS A DAY FOR MOURNING AND
SOLEMN TRIBUTE IN WASHINGTON.
DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL
AND OTHER MILITARY LEADERS LAID
A WREATH AT THE NAVY MEMORIAL IN
HONOR OF THOSE KILLED IN
MONDAY'S MASSACRE.
AND AT THE U.S. CAPITAL, SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER HARRY REID LED A
MOMENT OF SILENCE FOR 12 T 12
VICTIMS.
OFFICIALS ALSO RELEASED THE
NAMES OF THOSE KILLED.
ALL OF THEM CIVILIANS.
>> THIS IS A MET CAL PROCESS.
>> Reporter: INVESTIGATORS
CONFIRMED 34-YEAR-OLD AARON
ALEXIS-- KILLED BY POLICE DURING
THE ATTACK-- WAS THE LONE
SHOOTER.
ALEXIS, A BUDDHIST CONVERT WHO
GREW UP IN NEW YORK CITY, SERVED
AS A NAVY RESERVIST BASED IN
FORT WORTH, TEXAS, FOR FOUR
YEARS.
HE WAS CITED AT LEAST EIGHT
TIMES FOR INSUBORDINATION AND
DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
HE WAS GIVEN AN EARLY BUT STILL
HONORABLE DISCHARGE IN 2011.
ALEXIS ALSO HAD REPEATED RUN-INS
WITH THE LAW, ARRESTED IN
SEATTLE IN 2004 FOR ALLEGEDLY
SHOOTING AT A CONSTRUCTION
WORKER'S CAR TIRES AND AGAIN IN
2011 IN FORT WORTH, ACCUSED OF
FIRING A BULLET THROUGH HIS
APARTMENT CEILING.
THE F.B.I.'S VALERIE PILATE SAID
TODAY THAT HE CAME TO WASHINGTON
LAST MONTH.
>> WE CAN SAY WE HAVE DETERMINED
MR. ALEXIS ARRIVED IN THE
WASHINGTON, D.C. AREA ON OR
ABOUT AUGUST 26 AND HE HAS
STAYED AT LOCAL HOTELS IN THE
AREA SINCE THAT TIME.
MOST RECENTLY, HE IS KNOWN TO
HAVE STAYED AT A RESIDENCE INN
IN SOUTHWEST WASHINGTON, D.C.
STARTING ON SEPTEMBER 7.
>> Ifill: AT THE TIME OF
YESTERDAY'S SHOOTING, ALEXIS WAS
AN EMPLOYEE WITH W A DEPARTMENT
SUBCONTRACTOR, THE EXPERTS,
WORKING ON A NAVY YARD COMPUTER
PROJECT.
TO DO THIS WORK, HE HAD A VALID
PASS GRANTING HIM ACCESS TO THE
NAVY YARD'S BUILDING 197 WHERE
HE OPENED FIRE WITH A SHOOT
SCHOTT GUNN HE BROUGHT WITH HIM.
PLUS TWO HANDGUNS HE TOOK FROM
POLICE.
FRIENDS AND FAMILY EXPRESSED
DISBELIEF AT THE NEWS.
>> HE DIDN'T SEEM LIKE HE WOULD
BE THAT KIND OF PERSON THAT
WOULD BE THAT UPSET ENOUGH TO DO
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
>> AS A NEWCOMER TO THE FAMILY,
SOMEBODY SHOULD HAVE BEEN
WATCHING HIM.
>> Reporter: QUESTIONS WERE
RAISED TODAY AT ALEXIS'S MENTAL
STATE.
THE F.B.I. REFUSED TO COMMENT
THAT HE'D BEEN TREATING AT
VETERANS AFFAIRS HOSPITALS FAR
SERIES OF PROBLEMS INCLUDING
PAIR PARANOIA, A SLEEP DISORDER
AND HEARING VOICES.
THE NAVY HAD NOT DECLARED HIM
HIM MENTALLY UNFIT, THAT MEANT
HE WOULD HAVE BEEN STRIPPED OF
HIS SECURITY CLEARANCE.
JAY CARNEY SAID TODAY
ADMINISTRATION IS ALREADY
REVIEWING CONTRACTORS IN THE
WAKE OF LEAKS BY EDWARD SNOWDEN
AT THE NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY.
>> WE CAN TELL YOU THAT THE
PRESIDENT'S REACTION, O.M.B. IS
EXAMINE STANDARDS FOR
CONTRACTORS ACROSS FEDERAL
AGENCIES.
SO THIS IS OBVIOUSLY A MATTER
WITH THAT THE PRESIDENT BELIEVES
AND HAS BELIEVED MERITS REVIEW.
>> Ifill: PENTAGON OFFICIALS
ALSO SAID TODAY DEFENSE
SECRETARY HAGEL WILL ORDER HIS
OWN SECURITY REVIEW OF
DEPARTMENT IRNS LAGSS WORLDWIDE.
SO HOW DID AARON ALEXIS GAIN
ACCESS TO THE TIGHTLY SECURED
NAVY YARD, AND COULD OFFICIALS
HAVE SEEN IT COMING?
FOR THE LATEST DETAILS, WE TURN
TO ERNESTO LONDONO, WHO COVERS
THE PENTAGON FOR THE "WASHINGTON
POST."
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TODAY HAS BEEN A DAY FULL OF
"WHYs" AND "HOWs."
LET'S START WITH THE HOW.
HOW DO WE KNOW HE GAINED ACCESS
TO THIS INSTALLATION WHICH IS
CONSIDERED TO BE VERY SDMUR
>> RIGHT.
THE ANSWER ON THAT DIFFERENT
APPEARS TO BE PRETTY
STRAIGHTFORWARD AND THAT IS HE
WAS WORKING THERE.
HE HAD A LEGITIMATE NEED TO BE
IN THAT BUILDING BASED ON THE
WORK HE WAS DOING AS A
SUBCONTRACTOR FOR THE
DEPARTMENT.
THE BROADER QUESTION THAT PEOPLE
ARE RAISING IS IN LIGHT OF ALL
THE TROUBLING INFORMATION THAT
WE FOUND IN JUST A FEW HOURS--
AND YOU CAN FIND EASILY BY A
SIMPLE GOOGLE SEARCH-- WHAT THIS
MAN GIVEN HIS SECURITY CLEARANCE
AND A MILITARY BADGE THAT GAVE
HIM UNFETER ACCESS TO A SECURITY
FACILITY.
>> Ifill: DID WE GET TO THE THE
BOTTOM OF ANY OF THOSE QUESTIONS
TODAY?
>> NOT SUBSTANTIVELY.
I THINK PEOPLE AT THE PENTAGON
ARE DETERMINED TO DO A WHOLESALE
REVIEW OF ACCESS AT
INSTALLATIONS WORLDWIDE AND
THERE'S A HUGE INTEREST IN
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHETHER THE
-- THE MECHANISMS WE HAVE THERE
N PLACE TO SCREEN JOB CANDIDATES
AND CONTRACTORS ARE ADEQUATE.
VERY TROUBLINGLY, THERE WAS AN
INSPECTOR GENERAL'S REPORT
RELEASED TODAY SUGGESTING THAT
THE NAVY IN THE PAST -- IN THE
RECENT PAST, HAS CUT CORNERS
WHEN IT CAME TO VETTING PEOPLE
WHO WERE REQUESTING ACCESS TO
INSTALLATIONS.
THIS REPORT WAS IN THE WORKS FOR
SOME TIME AND IT'S NOT RELATED
TO THIS CASE BUT WHAT
INVESTIGATORS FOUND WAS THIS THE
NAVY WAS DOING BAD JOB OF
SCREENING PEOPLE AND AT LEAST 52
CASES IT GAVE BLAJS TO FELONS
WHO ARE NOT SUPPOSED TO BE GIVEN
ACCESS TO MILITARY
INSTALLATIONS.
>> Ifill: 52 CASES.
THAT SOUNDS LIKE A LOT,
ESPECIALLY LIGHT OF WHAT WE SAW
YESTERDAY, BUT WE KNOW NOW THAT
SECRETARY HAGEL AND THE
SECRETARY OF THE NAVY AND WE
HEARD THE PRESIDENT LAUNCHING
ALL KINDS OF INVESTIGATIONS.
HAVE THERE BEEN INVESTIGATIONS
INTO THIS SORT OF ACCESS BEFORE?
>> THERE HAVE.
HOWEVER, YOU KNOW, IF YOU LOOK
AT THE SERIOUS SECURITY BREACHES
THAT HAVE HAPPENED AT MILITARY
INSTALLATIONS, SORT OF THE
MASSIVE SHOOTING INCIDENTS,
THERE'S TWO MAJOR ONES:
YESTERDAY AND THE 2009 SHOOTING
AT FORT HOOD.
IN BOTH CASES THEY WERE
PERPETRATED BY PEOPLE WHO HAD
ACCESS TO BE THERE IN THE FIRST
PLACE.
SO I THINK FOCUS WILL LIKELY BE
WHETHER THERE WERE RED FLAGS
THAT WERE IGNORED.
WHETHER THERE WERE PEOPLE WHO UX
YOU KNOW, KNEW ABOUT THE
BEHAVIORAL ISSUES THAT THESE TWO
INDIVIDUALS HAD WHO COULD HAVE
FLAGGED THEM SOMEHOW.
WHERE THERE WERE MENTAL HEALTH
PROVIDERS WHO WERE IN A POSITION
TO KNOW THAT THESE PEOPLE WERE
UNSTABLE AND SHOWING SIGNS OF
DISTRESS AND ONCE THAT
INFORMATION IS SHARED WITH THE
PROPER AUTHORITIES COULD THESE
INCIDENTS HAVE BEEN STOPPED
EARLIER.
FILL FAIL SOMEWHAT PREDICTABLE
DEBATE ERUPTED IN WASHINGTON
TODAY ABOUT HOW HE MAY HAVE
GOTTEN HIS WEAPON.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT HOW HE
DID?
>> WE KNOW HE PURCHASED A
HANDGUN AT A GUN STORE IN
VIRGINIA ON SUNDAY.
IT APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN A PRETTY
STRAIGHTFORWARD TRANSACTION.
THEY DID A CHECK ON HIM.
THEY RUN HIS NAME THROUGH LAW
ENFORCEMENT DATABASES.
THERE WAS NO RED FLAG.
THERE WAS NO INDICATION THAT
HE'S A CONVICTED FELON WHICH
WOULD HAVE MADE HIM INELIGIBLE
FOR A GUN PURCHASE SO THE GUN
OWNER SOLD HIM THE WEAPONS AND
HE WALKED OUT OF THE STORE WITH
IT.
>> Ifill: WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT
HIS CLEAR FROM THE NAVY AT THE
TIME HE WAS SERVING AS A NAVAL
RESERVIST?
>> I WAS ABLE TO REACH ONE
FORMER COLLEAGUE WHO SAID VERY
EARLY ON HE WAS A BIT OF AN
INTROVERT, HE WAS SOMEBODY WHO
WASN'T VERY OUTGOING AND WAS
KIND OF QUIET AND RESERVED.
IN RECENT YEARS, THOUGH, SHE
TOLD ME SHE SAW TROUBLING
CHANGES IN HIS PERSONALITY.
HE BECAME VERY AGGRESSIVE.
HE WAS PRONE TO OUTBURSTS OF
ANGER WHEN THEY WERE OUT IN
SOCIAL SETTINGS.
HE WOULD SOMETIMES JUST ERUPT IN
SHOUTING MATCHES WITH PEOPLE
AROUND HIM FOR CAUSES THAT
DIDN'T SEEM TO WARRANT THAT
REACTION.
HE DIDN'T LIKE AUTHORITY.
HE WAS CONSTANTLY CHALLENGING
HIS SUPERIORS.
SO SHE TOLD ME THAT, YOU KNOW,
IT WAS CONCLUDED HE WAS NOT A
GOOD FIT FOR THE MILITARY
BECAUSE IF YOU'RE SERVING YOU
NEED TO KNOW HOW TO TAKE ORDERS.
>> Pelley: AND DO WE KNOW WHAT
HIS MOTIVES MAY HAVE BEEN?
>> WE DID NOT.
INCREASINGLY, I THINK WE'RE
SEEING SIGN HE IS HAD SOME
FAIRLY SERIOUS MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUES.
HE HAD COMPLAINED TO AUTHORITIES
HE WAS HEARING VOICES.
BEHAVIOR THAT APPEARS TO HAVE
BEEN DELUSIONAL, PARANOID FROM
WHAT WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO GLEAN
FROM LAW ENFORCEMENT SOURCES.
BUT THERE IS NO CLEAR-CUT
MOTIVE.
NOBODY HAS REALLY ARTICULATED
THAT HE HAD A HUGE AX TO GRIND
WITH THE NAVY, THAT HE WAS
FURIOUS AT THE NAVY, THAT THERE
WERE ANY INDIVIDUALS WORKING AT
THAT THE FACILITY THAT HE KNEW,
THAT HE MAY HAVE BEEN TRYING TO
SETTLE SCORES WITH.
SO AT THIS POINT NO IRRATIONAL
MOTIVE HAS EMERGED.
>> Ifill: AWFULLY TROUBLING.
IF THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: MONDAY'S SHOOTING
RAISES QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW
SOMEONE LIKE AARON ALEXIS IS
SCREENED
AND ALLOWED ACCESS TO A U.S.
MILITARY BASE, AND WHETHER HIS
PAST SHOULD HAVE RAISED ALARM IN
THE SCREENING PROCESS.
DR. ELSPETH CAMERON RITCHIE HAD
A 24-YEAR CAREER IN THE ARMY AS
A PSYCHIATRIST.
AND DR. E. FULLER TORREY IS A
PSYCHIATRY PROFESSOR AT THE
UNIFORMED SERVICES UNIVERSITY OF
THE HEALTH SCIENCES.
WE WELCOME BOTH OF YOU TO THE
NEWSHOUR.
DR. RITCHIE, TO YOU FIRST.
WHAT HAVE YOU HEARD BOTH JUST
NOW IN THE INTERVIEW WITH THE
REPORTER ERNESTO LONDONO AND
WITH -- THAT YOU'VE BEEN READING
TODAY THAT RAISES QUESTIONS IN
YOUR MIND ABOUT WHO AARON ALEXIS
WAS?
>> THERE IS A LOT THAT RAISES
QUESTIONS IN MY MIND.
FIRST, THOUGH, I WANT TO SEND
OUT MY CONDOLENCES SO-TO-THE
FAMILY MEMBERS OF THE DECEASED
AND TO THE FRIENDS AND
COLLEAGUES OF THOSE WHO DIED
BECAUSE THEY'RE REALLY IMPORTANT
TO KEEP THEM IN OUR THOUGHTS.
IN TERMS, THOUGH, OF THIS
GENTLEMAN'S MENTAL STATE, WHEN
YOU LOOK BACK, THERE'S RED FLAGS
ALL OVER THE PLACE.
THERE'S A PROBLEM HE HAD WHEN HE
WAS IN THE NAVY.
THERE'S THESE EPISODES, THE
HEARING VOICES PIECES AND YOU
SAY HOW DID THIS PERSON EVER GET
A SECURITY CLEARANCE?
HAVING SAID THAT, WHAT I'VE SEEN
OFTEN IS IN RETROSPECT YOU CAN
LOOK BACK AND SEE THE PROBLEMS,
BUT AT THE TIME PEOPLE WERE NOT
PUTTING THAT INFORMATION
TOGETHER.
I SERIOUSLY DOUBT THE PEOPLE WHO
GRANTED THE SECURITY CLEARANCE
KNEW THAT HE WAS HEARING VOICES.
WHAT I DO WONDER, THOUGH, IT
SOUNDS LIKE HIS BEHAVIOR WAS
PRETTY BIZARRE AND I WONDER WHY
NOBODY PICKED IT UP EARLIER.
>> Woodruff: DR. TORREY, WHAT
ABOUT YOU?
WHAT ARE YOU HEARING AND READING
ABOUT HIM THAT CAUSES CONCERN?
>> JUDY, IT SOUNDS TO ME -- I
HAVEN'T EXAMINED HIM BUT ALL THE
INFORMATION THAT'S NOW OUT THERE
IT SOUNDS LIKE A FAIRLY TYPICAL
CASE OF PARANOID SCHIZOPHRENIA,
LATE-ON SET PARANOID
SCHIZOPHRENIA BEGINS LATER THAN
OTHER FORMS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA.
HE THOUGHT PEOPLE WERE FOLLOWING
HIM, HE THOUGHT PEOPLE WERE USE
MAGAZINES TO CAUSE VIBRATIONS IN
HIS BODY.
THIS IS A BRAIN DISEASE.
IT'S A BRAIN DISEASE LIKE
PARKINSON'S OR ALZEHIMER'S
DISEASE.
SOMETHING ALONG WITH HIS --
SOMETHING WENT WRONG WITH HIS
BRAIN IN HIS 20s AND YOU'RE
LOOKING AT SYMPTOMS OF THE
DISEASE, ONE OF WHICH IS ACTING
OUT AND IN THIS CASE KILLING
PEOPLE AND IN HIS MIND HE WAS
DOING IT BASED ON DELUSIONS.
MY GUESS IS THAT HE WAS
TERMINATED BY THE NAVY, MORE OR
LESS, DISCHARGED.
HE PROBABLY THINK IT IS NAVY
WERE DOING ALL THESE THINGS THAT
HE'S EXPERIENCING IN HIS MIND
AND HE WAS GOING TO GET BACK AT
THEM AND SO THIS EPISODE MAKES
NO SENSE TO US BUT TO HIM IT
MADE PERFECT SENSE.
>> Woodruff: AND WE'RE STILL
LOOKING FOR MORE INFORMATION
THAT WOULD CONFIRM YOUR THEORY.
DR. RITCHIE, WHAT ABOUT HIS --
THE FACT THAT -- THE VETERANS
ADMINISTRATION, THERE'S A REPORT
THAT THEY WERE TREATING HIM.
NOW, THAT HAS NOT BEEN
CONFIRMED.
WHAT ARE THE -- WHAT WOULD THE
NORMAL PROCEDURE BE IF SOMEONE
WHO IS A RETIRED NAVY RESERVIST
HAS CLEARANCE TO WORK ON A NAVY
BASE, IS BEING SEEN -- IF HE'S
BEING SEEN BY THE VETERANS
ADMINISTRATION, WHAT OBLIGATION
WOULD A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
HAVE TO SHARE THAT INFORMATION
WITH SOMEONE ELSE?
TO FLAG IT.
>> Pelley: THERE'S ALWAYS A
TENSION BETWEEN PRESERVING
MEDICAL CONFIDENTIALITY AND A
DUTY TO WARN.
JOB THAT THE V.A. HAD ANY
INFORMATION ABOUT HIM BEING
DANGEROUS, BUT IF THEY DID, THEY
WOULD DO A RISK ASSESSMENT AND
SAY HOW MUCH OF A DANGER IS THIS
PERSON.
ACTUALLY, PSYCHIATRIST DO THIS
ALL THE TIME.
AND WE WANT TO ENCOURAGE PEOPLE
TO SEEK TREATMENT SO THEY NEED
TO FEEL THAT WILL THAT
INFORMATION IS CONFIDENTIAL AND
ON THE OTHER HAND IF THERE'S AN
IDENTIFIED THREAT THEN WE HAVE A
DUTY TO WARN THE INTENDED
VICTIM.
AND I DON'T KNOW, AGAIN, WHO
KNEW WHAT WHEN.
>> Woodruff: DR. TORREY, A
COUPLE VERY CLEAR QUESTIONS
RAISED OUT OF THIS: HOW DID HE
GET THE SECURITY CLEARANCE TO BE
WORKING FOR A DEPARTMENT
SUBCONTRACTOR?
THIS COMPANY HE WAS WORKING FOR
THROUGH HEWLETT-PACKARD?
I MEAN, HOW ARE WE TO UNDERSTAND
SOMETHING LIKE THAT?
>> WELL, TWO OR THREE THINGS.
FIRST OF ALL, IT'S IMPORTANT TO
EMPHASIZE, JUDY, THAT MOST BEAM
SCHIZOPHRENIA DON'T BECOME
VIOLENT.
IT'S ONLY A SMALL NUMB MOTHER
WHO ARE NOT BEING TREATED WHO
BECOME VIOLENT.
AND YOU PUT IT ALL TOGETHER NOW
AND YOU SAY THIS GUY IS
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS.
HE HAD A BRAIN DISEASE, HE HAD
ALCOHOL ABUSE, APPARENTLY HE HAD
EPISODES OF VIOLENCE.
BUT NOBODY HAD THAT INFORMATION.
DR. RITCHIE IS QUITE RIGHT.
NOBODYED THAT INFORMATION TO PUT
TOGETHER AND SO ALSO PEOPLE WITH
PARANOID SCHIZOPHRENIA CAN LOOK
PRETTY GOOD IN AN INTERVIEW AND
SO IT'S DIFFICULT -- THIS IS A
MAN WHO DIDN'T KNOW HE WAS SICK,
HEED WHAT -- HE HAD NO AWARENESS
OF HIS ILLNESS.
HE WOULD HAVE BEEN HARD TO
TREAT.
>> Woodruff: WE ALSO KNOW,
DR. RITCHIE, THAT HIS FATHER HAS
TOLD REPORTERS THAT AARON ALEXIS
WAS AMONG THE FIRST RESPONDERS
ON 9/11.
THAT HE LIVED IN NEW YORK,
WORKED AT A COMMUNITY COLLEGE
CLOSE TO THE TWIN TOWERS.
COULD SOMETHING LIKE THAT-- AND
HIS FATHER SAID TO REPORTERS
THAT HE HAD SOME SORT
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS ILLNESS.
>> HE COULD HAVE HAD SOME
SYMPTOMS BUT I WANT TO MAKE
REALLY CLEAR TO P.T.S.D.,
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER,
DOES NOT CAUSE PEOPLE TO HEAR
VOICES.
PEOPLE MAY HAVE SOME JUMPPYNESS,
SOME HYPERVIGILANCE BUT THE KIND
OF PARANOID DELUSIONS THAT
DR. TORREY MENTIONED ARE NOT
CONSISTENT WITH P.T.S.D.
>> Ifill: DR. TORREY?
>> I STRONGLY AGREE WITH THAT.
I THINK THERE'S ANY P.T.S.D. IT
WAS A VERY MINOR ISSUE.
THIS FELLOW HAD A BRAIN DISEASE
THAT CAUSED SCHIZOPHRENIA,
ALMOST CERTAINLY.
THE QUESTION IS WHY HE WASN'T
BEING TREATED.
WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH INFORMATION
TO KNOW THAT.
TREATED, WE
PROBABLY WOULDN'T BE SEEING
THIS.
>> BUT WE DO KNOW SCHIZOPHRENICS
OFTEN HAVE NO INSIGHT INTO THEIR
DISEASE.
SO IT'S LIKELY THAT TREATMENT
WAS OFFER AND HE SAID "NO THANKS
I DON'T NEED THIS."
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO ASK YOU
VERY QUICKLY FROM THE TIME WE
HAVE.
THIS IS NOT THE FIRST TIME WE'VE
BEEN HAVING THIS CONVERSATION
ABOUT SOMEONE WITH A MENTAL OR
EMOTIONAL ILLNESS INVOLVED IN A
MASS SHOOTING IN THIS COUNTRY.
WHAT KINDS OF QUESTIONS SHOULD
WE BE ASKING AS A COUNTRY AFTER
THIS SORT OF AN EPISODE
DR. TORREY?
>> WE'RE SEEING MORE OF THOSE,
JUDY.
THIS IS INCREASING IN INCIDENTS,
THIS IS BECAUSE WE HAVE A TOTAL
BREAKDOWN OF THE PUBLIC MENTAL
HEALTH TREATMENT SYSTEM.
I JUST HAPPENED TO HAVE
PUBLISHED A BOOK COMING OUT
CALLED "AMERICAN PSYCHOSIS"
WHICH GIVES THE WHOLE HISTORY OF
THIS.
YOU'RE LOOKING AT A BREAKDOWN
WHERE WE'VE RELEASED FRENCH THE
HOSPITAL BUT DON'T PROVIDE
TREATMENT IN THE COMMUNITY FOR
THEM.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE HAVING PEOPLE
IN JAIL WHO ARE MENTALLY ILL,
HOMELESS MENTALLY ILL AND THAT'S
WHY WE'RE HAVING INCREASING
EPISODES OF VLENCIOE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WOULD YOU HAD?
>> I WOULD ADD WE ALSO HAVE TO
LOOK AT OUR GUN LAWS.
THE FACT THAT SOMEBODY WITH
MENTAL ILLNESS COULD GO PURCHASE
A GUN THAT DAY AND USE IT.
WE'VE HAD THIS CONVERSATION SO
MANY TIMES OVER THESE LAST FEW
YEARS CONNECTICUT, WITH AURORA,
WITH FORT HOOD.
WE HAVE TO STAND UP AND SAY WE
NEED TO HAVE A COMPREHENSIVE
INTELLIGENCE APPROACH TO HOW
PEOPLE CONTAIN GUNS.
>> Woodruff: AND WE BELIEVE HE
PURCHASED THE GUN LEGALLY IN THE
STATE OF VIRGINIA THE DAY BEFORE
THE SHOOTING.
WE'RE GOING TO LEAVE IT THERE
BUT WE THANK BOTH OF YOU FOR
BEING WITH US.
DR. ELSPETH RITCHIE, DR. FULLER
TORREY, THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN TO THE
FLOODING AND HEARTBREAK IN
COLORADO.
AS THE WATERS FINALLY RECEDE,
THE TOLL HAS BECOME CLEAR, WITH
ABOUT 19,000 HOMES EITHER
DAMAGED OR DESTROYED STATEWIDE.
AND MANY COLORODANS ARE SUDDENLY
FACED WITH TRYING TO REBUILD
THEIR LIVES.
NEWSHOUR PRODUCER MARY JO BROOKS
REPORTS FROM ONE OF THE HARDER-
HIT COUNTIES.
IT'S BREAKFAST TIME AT THIS HOME
IN COLORADO.
IT'S A BEEHIVE OF ACTITY.VI
SEVERAL FAMILIES WHO EVACUATED
FROM THE NEARBY MOUNTAIN TOWN OF
LYONS HAVE COME TO THEIR
FRIENDS' HOUSE IN SEARCH OF
SHELTER AND FOOD AFTER BEING
TRAPPED IN THEIR HOMES FOR TWO
AND A HALF DAYS.
LYONS, ONE OF THE HARDEST-HIT
COMMUNITIES IN THE FLOODING, HAD
BEEN CUT OFF FROM THE REST OF
THE WORLD WHEN TWO SMALL RIVERS
EXPLODED OVER THEIR BANKS,
SWAMPING THE ROADS IN AND OUT OF
TOWN.
>> EVERYBODY'S RELIEVED TO BE
FE.SA
THE FIRST DAY IT WAS A LITTLE
GIDDY, ACTUALLY.
IT WAS WEIRD COMING OUT AND
SEEING THE WORLD CONTINUING AS
NORMAL.
NOW, AFTER WE'VE HAD THE CHANCE
TO PROCESS, THERE'S SOME GRIEF
COMING UP AND A LITTLE BIT OF
KIND OF P.T.S.D.
>> Ifill: DR. TEAR FILMMAKER JEM
MOORE AND HIS FAMILY WERE ABLE
TO DRIVE OUT OF LYONS ONCE THE
WATER BEGAN TO RECEDE.
MANY OTHER RESIDENTS WERE
AIRLIFT BID NATIONAL GUARD
HELICOPTER.
OFFICIALS HAVE TOLD EVERYONE TO
LEAVE, EVEN IF THEIR HOUSES WERE
INTACT, SAYING UNSTABLE ROADS
AND BRIDGES AND THE COMPLETE
LACK OF SANITATION AND
ELECTRICITY MAKES THE TOWN
UNINHABITABLE.
MOST OF THE TOWNS
1,200 RESIDENTS HAVE FOLLOWED
THOSE ORDER, LEAVING BEHIND
HUNDREDS OF HOMES AND BUSINESSES
THAT ARE DAMAGED OR DESTROYED.
>> EVERYBODY'S TRYING TO FIND
HOUSING.
AS YOU MIGHT IMAGINE THE WHOLE
HOUSING MARKET HAS COMPLETELY
FILLED UP WITH EVACUEES FROM THE
MOUNTAIN TOWNS SO IT WILL BE
REALLY DIFFICULT TO FIND
TEMPORARY HOUSING.
>> Reporter: DAVID TILLER IS
ALSO ON THE HUNT FOR HOUSING.
A MUSICIAN, HE WATCHED AS THE
FLOODWATERS DESTROYED HIS HOME
AND RECORDING STUDIO.
>> WHEN I ACTUALLY SAW THE FACE
OF MY HOUSE, MY GUT JUST WENT
THROUGH MY FEET.
SEEING THE FACE OF THE HOUSE
JUST BLOWN OPEN AND REALIZING
THAT THERE WAS NOTHING
SALVAGEABLE, REALLY.
NOTHING OF THE HOUSE I COULD
TELL THAT WAS SALVAGEABLE.
IF I DON'T EVEN KNOW HOW TO
DESCRIBE IT.
>> Reporter: THE TOWN IS EARLY
QUIET.
STILL UNDER LOCKDOWN BY NATIONAL
GUARD TROOPS.
THERE ARE DOWNED POWER LINES AND
WATER LEAKS EVERYWHERE AND THE
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT IS
SURROUNDED WITH 34UD MUD.
A BRAND NEW RIVER HAS BEEN
CARVED OUT WHERE ONCE WERE
BALLFIELDS AND PARKING LOTS AND
LARGE CHUNKS OF COLLAPSE ROAD
FOR AN ASPHALT WATERFALL.
OFFICIALS ARE ONLY JUST
BEGINNING TO ARRIVE TO ASSESS
THE DAMAGE TO INFRASTRUCTURE SO
THERE'S NO WORD ON WHEN
RESIDENTS MIGHT BE ALLOWED TO
RETURN.
>> THEY'RE JUST GUESSING AT THIS
POINT.
THEY'RE SAYING TWO TO FOUR WEEKS
MINIMUM AND THEN THE MAXIMUM
NOBODY KNOWS.
WITH THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT
OUT, THE GAS LINES UP, THE POWER
LINES UP, THERE'S HUGE
INFRASTRUCTURE DAMAGE, BRIDGES,
ROADS, AS YOU MIGHT IMAGINE.
IT'S GOING TO BE AN ENORMOUS
TASK.
>> Reporter: TILLER ISN'T SURE
IF HE'LL EVEN BE ALLOWED TO
REBUILD.
>> I DON'T THINK THERE'S GOING
TO BE ANY INSURANCE COMPANY
THAT'S GOING TO COVER US.
ALL WE HAVE IS THIS CHULK OF
LAND THAT'S NOW PART OF A RIVER.
THE RIVER REROUTED ITSELF.
SO I DON'T KNOW WHAT WE'RE GOING
TO BE ABLE TO DO WITH THAT.
>> Reporter: KATHY BURNETT AND
MIKE WHIP ARE LUCKIER THAN MOST.
THEY'VE MANAGED TO STAY IN LYONS
SINCE THEY HAVE THEIR OWN SOURCE
OF WATER AND ELECTRICITY.
THEY OWN A TINY FARM WHICH HOSTS
WEDDING RECEPTIONS AND DINNERS.
STLOZ ALL BEEN CANCELED FOR THE
REST OF THE YEAR.
SINCE THEY HAVE GOATS AND
CHICKENS TO TEND THEY'LL STAY
PUT.
>> IT'S GOING TO BE GHOST TOWN
LIKE EXCEPT FOR THE MAINTENANCE
WORKERS AND NATIONAL GUARD.
>> Reporter: THEY ALSO OWNED A
MOBILE HOME TRAILER PARK WHICH
WAS COMPLETELY WIPED OUT.
BUT IT'S NOT THE FINANCIAL LOSS
THAT TROUBLES THEM.
>> ONE OF THE MOST DEVASTATING
THINGS TO US IN THE TOWN IS
PEOPLE ARE DISPLACED AND THE
TRAILER PARK, THERE'S 32
FAMILIES THAT WERE DISPLACED IN
THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT.
THAT'S A HEART BREAKER.
>> OUR TOWN IS GOING TO CHANGE
ENTIRELY.
ESPECIALLY ECONOMICALLY.
LIKE MANY TIMES, IT'S THE LOWER
INCOME PEOPLE ARE MOST DISPLACED
IT SEEMED LIKE.
AND THAT'S GOING TO CHANGE THE
COMPLEXION OF OUR COMMUNITY FOR
A LONG PERIOD OF TIME.
>> Reporter: ALTHOUGH RESIDENTS
KNEE A GREAT DEAL OF CHANGE AND
HARD WORK LIE AHEAD, THEY ARE
OPTIMISTIC THAT BOTH THE TOWN
AND ITS RESIDENTS WILL RETURN IN
THE COMING MONTHS.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, THE HEALTH
CARE REFORM LAW AND ITS IMPACT
ON INSURANCE COVERAGE.
NEW INSURANCE MARKETPLACES,
CALLED EXCHANGES, ARE GETTING
SET TO OPEN IN OCTOBER.
BUT THERE'S STILL MUCH
FRUSTRATION AND CONFUSION ABOUT
THE LAW.
A NEW
PUBLIC IS OPPOSED TO IT.
JUST 25% SAY THEY HAVE A VERY
GOOD UNDERSTANDING OF IT.
AND ONLY ABOUT HALF OF THE
UNINSURED AMERICANS SURVEYED
ARE SUPPORTIVE OF IT, WITH MANY
QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW IT WORKS.
WE'RE STARTING A SERIES TONIGHT
IN WHICH WE WILL TRY TO SWERAN
SOME OF YOUR MORE FREQUENTLY
ASKED QUESTIONS.
RAY SUAREZ IS IN CHARGE.
>> Suarez: IT'S INTENDED TO
PROVIDE NEW INSURANCE OPTIONS
FOR THOSE WHO ARE UNINSURED.
WHAT WE HEARD ON LINE AND FROM
PEOPLE WE'VE INTERVIEWED ARE
BASIC QUESTIONS: WHO CAN SIGN UP
AND WHAT'S COVERED.
THAT'S WHERE WE START TONIGHT.
JULIEOVNER ARE ARE FROM NPR IS
HERE TO TALK ABOUT.
THIS WE'VE BEEN HEARING ABOUT
EXCHANGES.
WHAT IS AN EXCHANGE AND WHO ARE
THE CUSTOMERS?
>> AN EXCHANGE A MARKETPLACE
WHERE PEOPLE WITH K GO AND SIGN
UP FOR HEALTH CARE COVERAGE.
IN THIS CASE, OCTOBER 1 IS THE
DATE YOU CAN SIGN UP BUT
INSURANCE DOESN'T BEGIN UNTIL
JANUARY 1 WITH THESE HEALTH CARE
EXCHANGES.
WHO CAN SIGN UP?
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT QUESTION
FOR EVERYTHING WE'VE HEARD ABOUT
THESE EXCHANGES.
THEY'RE NOT INTENDED FOR
EVERYBODY, IN FACT, THEY'RE NOT
INTENDED FOR MOST PEOPLE.
FOR MOST PEOPLE NOTHING IS GOING
TO CHANGE.
MOST PEOPLE GET THEIR INSURANCE
ON THE JOB.
THAT WILL CONTINUE.
THE EXCHANGES ARE FOR PEOPLE WHO
DON'T HAVE INSURANCE OR WHO BUY
THEIR OWN INSURANCE.
PEOPLE WHO ARE SELF-EMPLOYED
LARGELY.
THAT'S WHO THESE EXCHANGES ARE
AIMED AT AND THOSE ARE GOING TO
BE THE CUSTOMERS FOR THESE
EXCHANGES.
IN FACT, THE FIRST YEAR, THE
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
ESTIMATES ONLY ABOUT SEVEN
MILLION PEOPLE ARE GOING TO SIGN
UP FOR THE EXCHANGES OUT OF MORE
THAN 300 MILLION AMERICANS.
>> Suarez: SO IF YOU DON'T HAVE
INSURANCE, THIS WILL PROVIDE YOU
A WAY TO, WHAT?
EASILY COMPARE PRICES THAN
BEFORE?
>> YES.
EASILY COMPARE PRICES, EASILY
COMPARE PLANS AND EASILY SIGN UP
FOR INSURANCE.
THE EXCHANGES WILL ALSO BE A
PLACE WHERE IF YOU ARE ELIGIBLE
FOR MEDICAID, EITHER THE
EXPANDED MEDICAID IN THE STATES
THAT ARE EXPANDING MEDICAID OR
REGULAR MEDICAID IN STATES THAT
HAVE NOT EXPANDED MEDICAID, IF
YOU GO TO THE EXCHANGE AND
YOU'RE ELIGIBLE, THE EXCHANGE IS
SUPPOSED TO DIRECT YOU TO YOUR
STATE'S MEDICAID PROGRAM.
>> I'VE BEEN TALKING TO REGULAR
AMERICANS ON THE STREET ABOUT
THE CONFUSIONS THEY STILL HAVE,
THE CONCERNS THEY STILL HAVE
INCLUDING ONE WOMAN WHO'S
WORRIED ABOUT A FRIEND.
>> I'M FROM AUSTIN, TEXAS, AND
MY QUESTION IS SPECIFIC TO ONE
OF MY GIRLFRIENDS WHO NEEDS
SURGERY.
SHE DOES NOT HAVE HEALTH CARE,
SHE'S SELF-EMPLOYED.
I'M CURIOUS ABOUT HOW THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT IS GOING TO
HELP HER, HOW SHE'LL ACCESS
INSURANCE SO SHE CAN GET THE
SURGERY SHE NEEDS SO SHE CAN
RESUME HER FULL TIME WORKING
SCHEDULE.
>> Suarez: YOU MUST SEE A LOT OF
PEOPLE IN THAT PREDICAMENT.
WHAT'S UP THERE FOR THEM?
>> THESE ARE THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
BEEN WAITING MOST EAGERLY FOR
THE EXCHANGES TO OPEN.
ONE OF THE BIG CHANGES THAT
HAPPENS JANUARY 1 IS THAT
INSURANCE COMPANIES CAN NO
LONGER DISCRIMINATE AGAINST
PEOPLE WITH PRE-EXISTING HEALTH
CONDITIONS.
RIGHT NOW PEOPLE LIKE THIS
WOMAN'S FRIEND MAY HAVE GONE TO
TRY TO BUY INSURANCE AND SIMPLY
HAVE BEEN TURNED AWAY AND
COMPANIES HAVE SAID "WE CAN'T
AFFORD TO TAKE YOU BECAUSE THE
INDIVIDUAL MARKET ONLY SICK
PEOPLE WOULD SIGN UP BECAUSE
INDIVIDUAL INSURANCE HAS BEEN
VERY EXPENSIVE.
NOW WITH THE REQUIREMENT THAT
MOST PEOPLE HAVE INSURANCE,
INSURERS HAVE SAID NOW WE CAN
AFFORD TO ENSURE BOTH HEALTHY
PEOPLE AND SICK PEOPLE."
ON SO ON OCTOBER THE 1 THE
FRIEND CAN GO TO EXCHANGE, PICK
FROM WHATEVER INSURANCE POLICY
SHE LIKES, SIGN UPURANCE IRREGAS
OF HER PRE-EXISTING CONDITION,
GET THE CARE SHE NEEDS.
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
WAITING FOR EXACTLY THIS
COVERAGE.
>> Suarez: WE'VE ALSO BEEN
GETTING A LOT OF QUESTION
THROUGH THE NEWSHOUR WEB SITE.
GEORGE SMITH WRITES FROM LOS
ANGELES: "I KEEP HEARING ABOUT
LEVELS OF COVERAGE FROM BRONZE
ALL THE WAY TO PLATINUM."
HE WAS OPENLY A SKEPTIC ABOUT
THE LAW.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND IT IS A LITTLE BIT
CONFUSING.
THERE ARE SET BENEFITS THAT
EVERY PLAN THESE VO RIDE IS AND
OF YOUR MEDICAL -- YOURSICALLY
COVERED MEDICAL BILLS.
THAT'S THE FLOOR AND THAT WOULD
BE THE BRONZE PLAN.
FROM THERE YOU CAN DECIDE DO YOU
WANT TO PAY A HIGHER PREMIUM AND
GET SORT OF MORE BENEFITS PAID
OR DO YOU WANT TO PAY A LOWER
PREMIUM AND RUN THE RISK THAT IF
YOU GET SICK YOU'LL HAVE TO HAVE
MORE OF YOUR -- YOU'LL HAVE TO
PAY MORE OF YOUR BILLS OUT OF
POCKET.
SO HIGHER PREMIUM GETS YOU MORE
COVERAGE, LOWER PREMIUM GETS YOU
LESS COVERAGE.
SO IF YOU THINK YOU'LL STAY
HEALTHY YOU MIGHT WANT TO PAY A
LOWER PREMIUM THAT WOULD COVER A
SMALLER PERCENTAGE OF YOUR BILL
BUT THEY'RE ALL THE SAME TYPES
OF BENEFITS, IT'S HOW MUCH YOU
WOULD HAVE TO PAY OUT OF POCKET
IF YOU HAVE MEDICAL BILLS.
SO BASICALLY YOU'RE GOING TO
HAVE TOEST BHAT YOU THINK YOU
MIGHT HAVE IN MEDICAL BILLS AND
GO FOR THERE.
AND THERE'S A BROAD, SILVER,
GOLD, PLAT PLATH NUMB THAT COVER
DIFFERENT PERCENTAGE OF OUR
OUT-OF-POCKET SPENDING.
>> Suarez: WHAT I FOUND WHEN I
WAS SPEAKING TO PEOPLE IS THEY
HAD FUNDAMENTAL BASIC QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE NEW SYSTEM AND THAT
WOULD SEEM TO MATCH UP WITH WHAT
PEW FOUND IN ITS LATEST NUMBERS.
TELL US ABOUT THAT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
I THINK PEOPLE ARE STILL REALLY
CONFUSED.
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE FOUND --
INDEED, PEOPLE AREN'T SURE THE
LAW IS STILL THE LAW.
A LOT OF PEOPLE THINK WITH THESE
REPEATED REPEALS IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES THAT THE LAW
MIGHT HAVE BEEN REPEALED.
PEOPLE DON'T UNDERSTAND THE
BASICS.
SOME PEOPLE THINK THAT
EVERYBODY'S GOING TO GO TO THESE
EXCHANGES.
SOME PEOPLE SIMPLY HAVE NO IDEA
HOW THEIR OWN INSURANCE WORKS SO
IT'S NOT SURPRISING THEY DON'T
KNOW HOW THE NEW LAW WORKS
BECAUSE THEY DON'T UNDERSTAND
HOW THE BASICS OF THE HEALTH
SYSTEM WORKS.
SO IT'S EASY TO SEE WHY THIS IS
CONFUSING.
>> Suarez: WE'LL HELP PEOPLE OUT
THIS WEEK AND ALIE THEIR FEARS
AND EXPLAIN THE MECHANICS OF THE
LAW.
JULIE R.O.V.ER IN, THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
>> Woodruff: JULIE CONTINUES TO
ANSWER QUESTIONS AT HER HOME
BASE FOR PUBLIC MEDIA, OF
COURSE: NPR.
FOR OUR PART, WE WANT TO
CONTINUE TO HEAR FROM YOU.
ONLINE, WE'RE COLLECTING
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE NEW HEALTH
LAW, AND WE'LL BE ANSWERING
THOSE IN THE COMING DAYS.
>> Ifill: NEXT, WE HEAD NORTH TO
THE ARCTIC SEA.
THANKS TO CLIMATE CHANGE, THERE
ARE NOW NEW WATERS TO DISCOVER
THERE.
MELTING ICE HAS OPENED NEW
ROUTES FOR SHIPS, AND RAISED
CONCERNS ABOUT SAFETY FOR
MARITIME TRAFFIC IN UNCHARTED
TERRITORY.
NEWSHOUR PRODUCER APRIL BROWN
REPORTS PART TWO OF OUR SERIES,
"ARCTIC THAW."
>> Reporter: THE VIVID BLUE OF
THE MANY GLACIERS IN PRINCE
WILLIAM SOUND CAPTIVATE TOURISTS
FROM ALL OVER THE WORLD.
BUT THEY ARE SLOWLY SHRINKING.
>> WE'RE BACK HERE, YOU KNOW,
ABOUT FIVE MONTHS OUT OF THE
YEAR EVERY DAY, SO WE'RE
WATCHING THESE GLACIERS BREAK
OFF, MOVE BACK, AND WE'RE SEEING
THE CHANGE DAILY AND YEARLY.
>> Reporter: CODY HANNA CAPTAINS
THE "KLONDIKE EXPRESS" TOUR
BOAT.
HE SAYS THE MELTING GLACIERS
CREATE MORE NAVIGABLE WATER.
>> BARRY GLACIER PROBABLY BEING
ONE OF THE FASTEST-RECEDING
GLACIERS HERE IN THE SOUND, AND
I BELIEVE, FROM WHAT I'VE BEEN
TOLD AND THE PICTURES I'VE SEEN
OF 2003 UNTIL NOW, WE'RE OVER A
MILE BACK.
THAT'S A LOT OF WATER.
>> Reporter: OFF THE NORTH SLOPE
OF ALASKA, RAPID ICE MELTING IS
EVEN MORE PRONOUNCED.
PARTS OF THE ARCTIC OCEAN OFTEN
LOOK LIKE THIS IN THE SUMMER,
ICE-FREE.
JAMES OVERLAND IS AN
OCEANOGRAPHER WITH NOAA, THE
NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
ADMINISTRATION.
HE'S SPENT DECADES LOOKING AT
THE ARCTIC SEA ICE TRENDS.
>> IT'S A SCARY PROPOSITION THAT
THINGS ARE HAPPENING A LOT
FASTER THAN WE THOUGHT EVEN A
FEW YEARS AGO.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR THE
ARCC SUTIMMER SEA ICE EXTENT WAS
AT A RECORD LOW, SHRINKING
SIGNIFICANTLY OVER THE PAST
DECADE AND COVERING ONLY ABOUT
HALF THE AREA IT DID IN THE
EARLY 1990S.
>> THE REAL SCARY THING THAT
WE'RE FOCUSING ON NOW IS, IT'S
NOT JUST THE EXTENT, BUT IT'S
THE THICKNESS OF THE ICE, AND
THAT'S BEEN GOING DOWN
DRAMATICALLY.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO
OVERLAND, THREE-FOURTHS OF THE
VOLUME OF ARCTIC ICE HAS BEEN
LOST SINCE THE 1980s.
AND WHILE IT'S DESTROYED A LOT
OF HABITAT FOR ANIMALS LIKE THE
POLAR BEAR AND WALRUS, IT'S
OPENED THE DOOR FOR MANY
BUSINESSES.
>> SHELL OIL WAS BEGINNING TO
EXPLORE FOR OIL IN THE ALASKAN
ARCTIC.
CRUISE SHIPS.
>> Reporter: AND JUST LIKE HIS
FELLOW MARINERS FURTHER NORTH,
CAPTAIN HANNA HAS NO WAY TO KNOW
IT'S SAFE TO SAIL IN THE OPEN
WATER THE MELTING ICE LEAVES
BEHIND.
HE RELIES ON DETAILED CHARTS
FROM NOAA, AND HAS BEEN TALKING
WITH ONE OF ITS REPRESENTATIVES
ABOUT UPDATES THAT WILL LET HIM
KNOW HOW CLOSE HE CAN TAKE HIS
PASSENGERS TO THE GLACIERS THAT
REMAIN.
>> IT DEFINITELY CANNOT BE
UNDERESTIMATED HOW IMPORTANT
HAVING THESE CHARTS IS.
OBVIOUSLY SOMEONE CAME OUT HERE
FIRST-- SOMEONE EXPLORED,
SOMEONE PROBABLY BUMPED A FEW
ROCKS-- NOT SOMETHING WE WANT IN
OUR DAY AND AGE WITH THE
SOPHISTICATION THEY HAVE ON THE
CHARTS.
>> Reporter: JUST OFF THE SHORES
OF ALASKA, A SMALL SURVEY BOAT
IS GATHERING THE KIND OF DATA
THAT EVENTUALLY LEADS TO THE
CREATION OF CHARTS HANNA AND
OTHER MARINERS RELY ON.
THE SCIENTISTS ON BOARD ARE
PAINTING THE SEA FLOOR WITH
SONAR, GOING BACK AND FORTH OVER
A DESIGNATED AREA, AS IF MOWING
A LAWN SLOWLY.
HYDROGRAPHIC SURVEY TECHNICIAN
BARRY JACKSON SEES SOMETHING
BIG.
>> Reporter: THERE IS AN OBVIOUS
OBJECT THAT IS COMING INTO VIEW
HERE.
YOU CAN SEE THE MAST AND THE
SUPER STRUCTURE IN THERE.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE
INFORMATION IS THOROUGHLY
PROCESSED, IT BECOMES CLEARER
THIS IS THE OUTLINE OF A
SHIPWRECK.
>> Reporter: PREVIOUSLY UNKNOWN
POTENTIAL THREATS LIKE THIS ONE
ARE EXACTLY WHAT JACKSON AND
LIEUTENANT MEGHAN McGOVERN ARE
LOOKING FOR.
>> WE'RE PART OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF COMMERCE, SO WE'RE HERE TO
MAKE SURE THAT COMMERCE IS SAFE,
THAT THEY CAN NAVIGATE THESE
WATERS.
ALASKA IS VERY HEAVILY
TRAFFICKED WITH, YOU KNOW, BIG
SHIPS, SMALL SHIPS, FISHING
BOATS-- ALL KINDS OF TRAFFIC
THAT MOVES THROUGH HERE.
AND OUR JOB IS TO FIND THE ROCKS
AND THE SHIPWRECKS AND ANY OTHER
HAZARDS THAT ARE THERE, SO THAT
SO THAT THOSE VESSELS DON'T RUN
INTO ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: THE SMALL SURVEY
BOAT JACKSON AND McGOVERN ARE
WORKING ON WAS LAUNCHED FROM THE
NOAA SHIP "RAINIER."
ITS CAPTAIN IS COMMANDER RICK
BRENNAN.
>> I THINK THE SURFACE OF MARS
HAS BEEN MAPPED BETTER THAN OUR
OCEANS HAVE BEEN.
>> Reporter: BRENNAN'S SHIP AND
CREW HAVE SPENT THE SUMMER
CHARTING THE POPULAR FISHING
AREA OFF ALASKA'S SHUMIGAN
ISLANDS, WHERE THE "RAINIER"
ITSELF CAN MOW A KILOMETER-WIDE
PATH WITH SONAR.
ITS SUMMER CRUISE-- AS IT'S
KNOWN-- IS PART OF A LARGER NOAA
EFFORT TO GET MORE INFORMATION
ABOUT THE VAST WATERS AROUND THE
STATE, ESPECIALLY THOSE IN
HIGHER LATITUDES-- WHERE, IF
CURRENT TRENDS CONTINUE, MORE
SHIPS ARE HEADING.
ACCORDING TO GOVERNMENT FIGURES,
THE NUMBER OF VESSELS TRANSITING
THROUGH THE ARCTIC HAS MORE THAN
DOUBLED SINCE 2008, FROM ABOUT
120 TO 250 LAST YEAR, WITH
TANKERS, CARGO SHIPS, AND TUGS
LEADING THE WAY.
BUT THERE IS SOMETIMES LITTLE OR
NO INFORMATION TO ENSURE A SAFE
PASSAGE, PARTICULARLY IN THE
ARCTIC CIRCLE.
IN MANY PLACES, ONLY RUDIMENTARY
DEPTH MEASUREMENTS EXIST, SOME
DATING BACK TO THE 1700s, WHEN
THE BRISH ITNAVY'S CAPTAIN COOK
SAILED AROUND ALASKA.
>> AS YOU PROCEED NORTH FROM THE
ALASKA PENINSULA AND YOU START
PROCEEDING UP TOWARDS BARROW AND
PRUDHOE, IT'S ST THE SOUNDINGS
OR THOSE MEASUREMENTS THAT WE
HAVE OF THE... YOU KNOW, OF HOW
DEEP THE WATER IS JUST CONTINUE
TO GET LESS AND LESS AND LESS,
BECAUSE THOSE AREAS HAD NEVER
BEEN MAPPED BECAUSE THEY WERE
COVERED WITH ICE.
>> Reporter: AND IT'S ONE OF THE
REASONS THE "RAINIER'S" SISTER
SHIP, "THE FAIRWEATHER,"
SURVEYED A PATH THROUGH THE
ARCTIC LAST SUMMER, SAILING
NORTH FROM THE ALEUTIAN ISLANDS
UP THE WEST COAST OF ALASKA,
THROUGH THE BERING STRAIT AND
INTO THE WATERS OFF ALASKA'S
NORTH SLOPE, THROUGH THE CKCHIHU
PAST BARROW AND INTO THE
BEAUFORT SEA BEYOND PRUDHOE BAY.
THE VOYAGE SIMPLY WOULD NOT HAVE
BEEN POSSIBLE EVEN A FEW DECADES
AGO.
AS ARCTIC SEA ICE CONTINUES TO
MELT AND HUMAN ACTIVITY IN THE
AREA GROWS, SO, TOO, DOES THE
PRESSURE ON THE COAST GUARD.
ITS OPERATIONS, BOTH LAND AND
SEA, ARE BASED HERE IN KODIAK.
WHEN THAT ICE RECEDES, THEN THE
VESSELS ARE GOING TO INCREASE,
AND IF SOMETHING DOES GO WRONG
IN THE ROUGHLY 500,000 MILES OF
WATER AROUND THE STATE, THE
COAST GUARD IS THE AGENCY THAT
RESPONDS.
COMMANDER MARK VISLAY IS THE
KODIAK AIR STATION'S OPERATIONS
OFFICER.
>> AN AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR
ONE OF OUR PRIMARY
RESPONSIBILITIES IS TO ENSURE
THE SAFE AND SECURE OPERATIONS
OF MARITIME TRAFFIC, AND THAT'S
WHERE WE COME INTO PLAY-- SEARCH
AND RESCUE RESPONSE TO
DISTRESSED MARINERS.
>> Reporter: BUT THE COAST GUARD
IS ALSO TASKED WITH
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND
RESPONDING TO POTENTIAL
DISASTERS.
IN JANUARY, NOT FAR FROM ITS
KODIAK BASE, THE ROYAL DUTCH
SHELL RIG "KULLUK," WHICH HAD
BEEN DRILLING OFF ALASKA'S NORTH
SLOPE, RAN AGROUND DURING A
VIOLENT STORM WHILE BEING TOWED
SOUTH.
THE AGENCY PREPARED FOR THE
POSSIBILITY THAT THOUSANDS OF
GALLONS OF DIESEL FUEL AND OTHER
FLUIDS COULD LEAK OUT OF THE
STRANDED RIG.
THAT DIDN'T HAPPEN.
BUT WITH AN EXPANDING AREA TO
COVER AND MORE VESSELS GOING
THROUGH, VISLAY ADMITS THE COAST
GUARD IS BEING STRETCHED.
>> WE CAN MANAGE THE RISK, IF
YOU WILL, BUT WE DEFINITELY ARE
SHORT OF WHAT WE NEED TO COVER
THIS ENTIRE AREA OF
RESPONSIBILITY UP HERE IN
ALASKA.
>> Reporter: ALL THREE MEMBERS
OF ALASKA'S CONGRESSIONAL
DELEGATION IN WASHINGTON HAVE
LONG BEEN CALLING FOR MORE
GENERAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND COAST
GUARD RESOURCES.
DEMOCRAT MARK BEGICH SAYS IT'S
BEEN AN UPHILL BATTLE, BUT THAT
LAWMAKERS ARE SLOWLY COMING
AROUND.
>> WHEN I CAME HERE FIVE YEARS
AGO, I'M NOT SURE PEOPLE REALLY
UNDERSTOOD THAT THERE WAS AN
ARCTIC OCEAN, TO BE VERY FRANK
WITH YOU.
AND SO HAVING THAT DISCUSSION
ABOUT THE IMPACTS OF WHAT'S
GOING ON THERE, IT'S NOT A
QUESTION IF THE ARCTIC WILL BE
DEVELOPED-- IT'S HAPPENING.
THE QUESTION IS, HOW DO WE
MANAGE IT?
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, THE
COAST GUARD ESTABLISHED A
TEMPORARY FORWARD OPERATING BASE
IN THE ARCTIC NEAR THE BERING
STRAIT THIS SUMMER.
LAST YEAR 480 VESSELS SAILED
THROUGH THE 58-MILE-WIDE PASSAGE
BETWEEN THE U.S. AND RUSSIA--
MORE THAN TWICE AS MANY AS IN
2008.
>> Ifill: OUR NEXT REPORT COMES
FROM THE NORTH SLOPE, WHERE
NATIVE ALASKANS HAVE HUNTED FOR
WHALES FOR GENERATIONS.
BUT THEIR SUBSISTENCE LIFESTYLE
IS NOW ENDANGERED BY MELTING
ARCTIC ICE.
WE'VE POSTED A PREVIEW ON OUR
HOME PAGE.
ALSO ONLINE, YOU'LL FIND A
LESSON PLAN TO HELP STUDENTS
UNDERSTAND THE HOW SCIENTISTS
STUDY CLIMATE CHANGE.
THAT'S ON NEWSHOUR EXTRA, OUR
SITE FOR TEACHERS AND STUDENTS.
>> Woodruff: NOW, HAITIAN-BORN
NOVELIST EDWIDGE DANTICAT
RETURNS WITH HER FIRST NOVEL IN
A DECADE, AND HER FIRST WORK OF
FICTION ABOUT HER NATIVE COUNTRY
SINCE THE 2010 EARTHQUAKE THERE.
IT'S CALLED "CLAIRE OF THE SEA
LIGHT."
JEFFREY BROWN SAT DOWN WITH HER
EARLIER TODAY.
HERE'S AN EXCERPT FROM THEIR
CONVERSATION.
.
>> Brown: WHAT IS THE STORY YOU
WANT TO TELL?
THE STORY OF HAITI THAT YOU
REACH FOR IN SO MANY OF YOUR
WORKS?
>> WELL, AIN'T MULTIPLICITY OF
STORIES TO BE TOLD ABOUT HAITI.
I THINK HAITI IS ONE OF THOSE
PLACES THAT IS OFTEN PORTRAYED
IN A VERY SINGULAR WAY AND I
CERTAINLY WOULDN'T WANT TO
PARTICIPATE IN THAT AND MAYBE
THIS IS WHAT HARKENS ALL THESE
VOICES IN THIS ONE TOWN.
I WANT PEOPLE TO SEE THE STORY
OF COMMUNITIES.
THERE'S THE STORY OF POVERTY BUT
ALSO GREAT WEALTH NEXT TO THAT
POVERTY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
STORIES, THE STORY OF DIFFERENT
RELIGIONS.
SO THAT -- THERE'S LITTLE BIT OF
THAT IN THE TOWN BUT IF PEOPLE
GO BACK TO READ OTHER
LITERATURES OF HAITI, IT'S
CERTAINLY HAITI IS NOT A
MONOLITHIC COMMUNITY, IT'S A
BEAUTIFUL ARTISTIC AND SPIRITUAL
COMMUNITY BUT IT'S NOTHING --
IT'S NOTHING MONOLITHIC ABOUT
IT.
>> Brown: AND YOU REACH BACK FOR
THAT -- IN THIS CASE, THIS IS
BASED ON YOUR MOTHER'S STORY OR
YOUR MOTHER'S TOWN.
SO YOU REACH BACK FOR THAT IN A
KIND OF A PERSONAL WAY?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I REACH BACK AND I THINK THAT'S
WHAT ALL WRITERS DO, YOU REACH
BACK BUT REACH FORWARD.
YOU ALSO TRY TO PRESENT A WORLD
IN A WAY THAT YOU WOULD LIKE IT
TO BE.
YOU TRY TO SOLVE PROBLEMS IN A
WAY YOU WISH THEY WOULD BE
SOLVED SO THERE'S NO REACHING
BACK, THERE'S ALSO AN
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE PRESENT
BECAUSE HAITI LIVES IN A VERY
EVER IS-URGENT PRESENT EVEN WITH
HIS EXTRAORDINARY HISTORY,
EXTRAORDINARY ART, EXTRAORDINARY
PEOPLE.
BUT IT ALSO LIVES IN A VERY
DIFFICULT PRESENCE.
SO IT'S THE MARRIAGE, I THINK,
ARTS, THE ARTS ALLOW US A KIND
OF MERGING OF ALL OF THESE
ELEMENTS.
>> Brown: THIS STORY HAS A SORT
OF TIMELESSNESS TO IT.
YOU TOLD ME THAT IT WAS SET IN
2009 BEFORE THE EARTH WAKE, BUT
I'M WONDERING HOW HAS THE
EARTHQUAKE CHANGED THE KIND OF
STORY THAT YOU THINK NEEDS TO BE
TOLD?
>> WELL, I MEAN, THE EARTHQUAKE
IS PART OF NOW THE PRESENT OF
HAITI AND WILL ALWAYS HAVE A
LIFE BEFORE THE EARTHQUAKE, A
LIFE AFTER THE EARTHQUAKE.
I DON'T FEEL CAPABLE OR READY
YET TO WRITE STORIES THAT ARE
SET AFTER THE EARTHQUAKE.
SO I WANTED TO SET THIS STORY ON
THE CUSP.
YOU KNOW, THE THIS TOWN IS RIGHT
BEFORE THE EARTHQUAKE AND HOW
PEOPLE WERE LIVING THEIR LIVES
AND MAYBE IT'S MY ATTEMPT OF
HANGING ON A LITTLE BIT LONGER
TO SOMETHING THAT WAS.
>> Brown: AND HOW DO YOU DO THIS
NOW LIVING IN THE UNITED STATES?
NOT LIVING IN HAITI?
>> WELL, I -- YOU DO -- I DO IT
BY RETURNING.
I DO IT BY READING.
BY THE GREAT LITERATURE.
I DO IT BY JUST STAYING IN
TOUCH.
I THINK'S A PART OF ME-- LIKE
ALL CHILDREN OF IMMIGRANTS--
THERE'S A PART OF US ALWAYS IN
HAITI.
WE'RE NOT IN THE PHYSICAL PLACE
RIGHT NOW BUT I DO IT BY STAYING
CONNECTED AND WHEN I WRITE ABOUT
HAITI IT'S ALSO A WAY FOR KNOW
GO BACK.
JUST IN THE WAY THAT WHEN I READ
OR LOOK AT THE BEAUTIFUL ART OR
LISTEN TO THE WONDERFUL MUSIC.
IT'S ANOTHER WAY OF -- FOR KNOW
GO BACK WHEN I'M NOT ABLE TO
PHYSICALLY GO BACK.
>> Woodruff: YOU CAN FIND JEFF'S
FULL INFORMATION FROM DANTICAT
AND READ AN EXCERPT FROM HER
NOVEL ON OUR ART BEAT PAGE.
IT'S THE FIRST IN A NEWLY
EXPANDED SERIES OF TALKS WITH
NOVELISTS AND WRITERS.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, A NEW
SIX-HOUR DOCUMENTARY SERIES ON
PBS BEGINS TONIGHT THAT
CHRONICLES THE EXPERIENCES OF
LATINOS IN NORTH AMERICA.
FIVE CENTURIES OF RICH HISTORY
IS TOLD THROUGH THE VERY HUMAN
DRAMAS OF INDIVIDUALS.
THIS EXCERPT FOCUSES ON A YOUNG
SOCIAL STUDIES TEACHER IN 1960s
LOS ANGELES WHO WAS UNHAPPY WITH
LOW GRADUATION RATES FOR MEXICAN
AMERICAN KIDS.
SO EVEN AS CIVIL RIGHTS LEADERS
CALLED FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY FOR
ALL, SAL CASTRO SPECIFICALLY
WORKED TO IMPROVE CHANCES FOR
LATINO STUDENTS.
>> BY 1967 WITH MARTIN LUTHER
KING ORGANIZING IN THE SOUTH AND
CESAR CHAVEZ ORGANIZING IN
CALIFORNIA, CASTRO BANEG LOOKING
FOR WAYS TO ORGANIZE STUDENTS
INEST L.A.
>> I WENT TO SEE MY FATHER AND I
SAID WHAT DO YOU THINK?
AND HE LOOKED AT ME AND HE SAID
"I DON'T THINK."
THAT'S ALL HE SAID.
>> CASTRO WAS DETERMINEIZE A STS
MANY SCHOOLS AS POSSIBLE.
STUDENTS DREW UP A LIST OF
DEMANDS THAT INCLUDED HAVING
CLASSES IN MEXICAN AMERICAN
HISTORY AND HIRING MORE LATINO
TEACHERS.
CASTRO ENLISTED RECENT GRADUATES
TO HELP.
>> THERE'S KIDS TODAY IN THE
SCHOOLS THAT ARE GOING THROUGH
THE SAME EXPERIENCE THAT YOU
GUYS DID THAT I DID.
AND I WANT YOUR HELP TOP GET IT
TO STOP.
>> THE WORD STARTED TO
CIRCULATE.
WALKOUT.
LET'S BOYCOTT SCHOOL.
AND WE SLOWLY PLANNED THIS OUT,
CAMPUS BY CAMPUS OVER A
SIX-MONTH PERIOD AND WE SET A
DATE.
MARCH 6, 1968.
>> I WAS SCARED, EXCITED,
NERVOUS.
MY MOTHER TOLD ME "I'LL MEET YOU
IN FRONT OF SCHOOL.
LOOK FOR ME."
SO THAT REALLY EMPOWERED ME.
>> I GOT TO LINCOLN HIGH SCHOOL,
I KNEW THAT OTHERS WERE AT
ROOSEVELT.
WE HAD ALL COORDINATED AND
OTHERS WERE AT GARFIELD AND SOME
WERE AT WILSON.
BELMONT WAS READY AS WELL.
>> I REMEMBER BEING REALLY
NERVOUS AND NOT KNOWING "CAN I
DO THIS?
WHAT IF I TEEM ONLY ONE THAT
GETS UP AND DOES THIS?
CAN I REALLY DO THIS?"
>> AND THE TIME CAME, 10:00, I
WALKED ON TO CAMPUS, NOBODY WAS
WALKING OUT.
AND I STARTED YELLING UP AND
DOWN THE HALLWAYS "WALKOUT,
WALKOUT, WALKOUT!"
>> I STOOD UP AND WALKED OUT OF
THE CLASSROOM.
I WAS AFRAID TO LOOK BEHIND ME
TO SEE IF ANYONE ELSE WAS
COMING.
>> AND THEN THE DOORS STARTED TO
FLING OPEN AND STUDENTS JUST
RUSHED OUT.
>> THE ROAR OF THE FOOTSTEPS ALL
COMING DOWN STAIRWELL WHERE I
WAS, THAT WAS EXCITING.
ALL I REMEMBERED WAS, OKAY, I
MOM IS.GO TO THE FRONT GATE
AND THERE SHE IS.
AS ALL OF THE STUDENTS CAME OUT,
I PICKETED LINCOLN HIGH SCHOOL
WITH MY MOTHER.
>> OVER A THOUSAND KIDS WERE OUT
THERE AND I LOOKED BACK AND WAS
LIKE, WOW, LOOK AT ALL THE
STUDENTS AND PARENTS COMING OUT
AND JOINING US.
IT WAS A VERY EMOTIONAL TIME FOR
ME.
IT WAS BEAUTIFUL.
>> BY THE END OF THE DAY, MARCH
6, 1968, SOME
10,000 STUDENT HAD PEACEFULLY
WALKED OUT OF FOUR EAST LOS
ANGELES HIGH SCHOOLS.
>> Woodruff: A SAD POSTSCRIPT,
SAL CASTRO DIED THIS PAST APRIL
AT THE AGE OF 79.
"LATINO AMERICANS" AIRS OVER
THREE CONSECUTIVE TUESDAY NIGHTS
ON PBS, WITH THE FIRST TWO-HOUR
INSTALLMENT THIS EVENING.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THERE WERE NEW DISCLOSURES THAT
THE WASHINGTON NAVY YARD GUNMAN
MAY HAVE HAD MENTAL PROBLEMS,
INCLUDING HEARING VOICES.
MEANWHILE, DEFENSE SECRETARY
HAGEL ORDERED SECURITY REVIEWS
AT ALL MILITARY SITES.
AND THE DEATH TOLL IN THE
COLORADO FLOODS ROSE TO EIGHT,
WITH AT LEAST 1,600 HOMES
DESTROYED.
>> Woodruff: TONIGHT'S EDITION
OF "FRONTLINE," "EGYPT IN
CRISIS," IS A PARTNERSHIP WITH
GLOBAL POST AND LOOKS AT THE
RISE AND FALL OF THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY WE HAVE A NEWSMAKER
INTERVIEW WITH SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE CHUCK HAGEL.
WE'LL DISCUSS THE MASS SHOOTING
AT THE NAVAL YARD AND THE
MILITARY'S ROLE IN DEALING WITH
SYRIA.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
ON BEHALF OF ALL OF US AT THE
PBS NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU, AND
GOOD NIGHT.